what are some of the biggest things that
people get wrong about fasting oh it's a
great first start the biggest thing is
they hook onto one fast and they do it
the same way over and over and over
again so once they come to fasting they
go okay wow got great results I feel
incredible
um I'm just skipping breakfast I'm
starting to eat at noon every day and
they just do that for months and months
and months and then they get stuck why
would that repetition be a problem and
is is there like a right entry point
yeah because I think if people haven't
tried fasting they probably just think
just don't eat
or and this this will be interesting uh
there are things that I probably don't
consider a fast that you might consider
a fast yeah so
um let's get into that is there one
beginner's entry point two fasting yeah
you know where The Beginner's entry
point is if you really want it to be
like Smooth it's with your food so if
you want fasting to that whole world of
fasting to become much easier the first
thing is change three ingredients change
your oils change your carbs so you're
eating more of Nature's carbs less
refined carbs and get off any toxic
ingredients if you change those three
things now you're going to metabolically
switch over into what we call the fat
burning State much quicker now you don't
have to and a lot of people don't but if
you're asking me what's the easiest way
door in it's just let's clean up a
little bit of the diet now the second
step is let's just start pushing your
breakfast back like a half hour an hour
and you're gonna what you're going for
is you're trying to compress all of your
food into one eating window and if you
do those two things it's kind of like
there's a click that happens and all of
a sudden it's like oh you're fasting
it's easier it's and it just becomes
effortless because it's our Natural
State it's the way the body was designed
to be so but toxic ingredients toxic
food makes us more insulin resistant
eating all day is destroying
mitochondrial energy and so we're not
able to make that switch as easily which
is why I like to start with the food
interesting okay so to do a fast well
step one is to reorient your diet to
something that isn't causing metabolic
damage I'm not sure yeah yeah
inflammatory metabolic damage so you're
looking like let's use an example
um
um canola oil or like cottonseed oil or
or some of those basically the oils that
everything you eat unless unless you are
buying Whole Foods yourself is cooked in
okay so there's bing bing bing that's
the the answer right there is let's get
back to Whole Foods foods that are
coming out of Nature and if I if I went
into your house and I just swapped out
all the oils for avocado oil and olive
oil you'd be you you wouldn't notice a
taste and it's the same to cook with and
if you're doing that mixed with Whole
Foods and meats if you eat Meats then
now you're actually more congruent with
what the human body wants it's when we
get all these fancy ingredients and
toxic inflammatory uh easy to make
ingredients that it makes that metabolic
switch so much more difficult which is
why I always say just let's and it's not
like it doesn't have to be rigid you can
be playful about it like let me just see
what I can do to stop eating so many
inflammatory oils Mindy there's nothing
playful about starving to death so this
is it's interesting I'm as you're saying
this I'm like wow I'm one of the people
that would probably propagate some of
the myths and create problems for people
because I'm forgetting how hard it was
for me to metabolically transition
because I did it so long ago
so
um going back to this framing of okay
before you want to fast you want to get
things right my literally until nine
seconds ago when you said that my my
instinct would be to tell people hey
just start lengthening the window
between what you eat is yeah but if I
flash back to when I just when I went
low carb so I didn't even consider
fasting didn't think about fasting and
honestly I think you know 20 plus years
ago when I started all this
I would have thought of fasting as
dangerous and
part of the reason I would have thought
of fasting is dangerous is going without
food but really it was sugar because I
was a sugar burner at the time it hurt
you know what I mean like so
um I'll do this frequently when I have a
guest on around fasting so I'm fasted
right now I'm over 19 hours into my fast
as we're doing this uh and there's no
sense of suffering yeah and don't get me
wrong I have a mild sense that I'm
hungry yeah but I it's not overwhelming
it's certainly not impairing my
cognition but when I first went low carb
it was so devastating and I had these
terrible headaches and I remember my
wife and I got in this big fight because
uh I was like if I just eat a cookie I
will feel better and she was like then
eat the cookie but stop complaining like
whatever you're gonna do either get on
the other side of this or uh eat the
cookie but don't not eat the cookie and
keep complaining and so I was like okay
that's probably pretty good advice so
for somebody who's at the beginning walk
me through you mentioned it but let's go
a little bit deeper in terms of what is
that that click over that people are
looking for what is metabolic
flexibility what is being a sugar burner
or how do we get on the other side of
that yeah so it's such a good question
and it's interesting because I'm
thinking as you're talking I'm like yeah
you know my advice used to be hey the
door end of fasting is compress the
eating window and leave a longer period
of time for fasting but we just saw
millions of people on my YouTube channel
where they would write in comments and
they're like I can't metabolically
switch over I'm really struggling so
then I start to change well let's start
by cleaning up so do fasting but they
feel terrible yeah oh yeah so and that's
the thing is that we we need to look at
this like a switch so when you're eating
food you are in a sugar burner state so
what's happening is that your blood
sugar is going up and then you stop
eating and then the blood sugar starts
to come down and usually when it gets to
a certain point you get hungry and so
you eat again and so you're just doing
this all day long but what word saying
when you want to be metabolically
flexible is we want to keep your blood
sugar fairly low
so that we can switch you over into this
fat burning place and once you switch
over into the fat burner place there's a
whole world of healing internal healing
that is going to happen a lot more than
just weight loss there's a lot more
brain like to your point I love that you
show up fasted I showed up fasted too
and I do it as a Performance Tool
because I know I'm going to get ketones
that are going to power up my brain I
know inflammation is going to come down
I know I can get rid of senescent cells
I know I can reboot my immune system I
know I can add more dopamine receptor
sites the longer I stay over here but if
I'm over here bringing my blood sugar up
all the time getting this switch becomes
like Rusty and you just can't get over
there so the suffering happens in that
switch and that's what I'm trying to get
people out of because fasting is like
sleeping it is our natural healing state
feet and just because we know sleeping
is amazing doesn't mean that everybody
can sleep
it's really interesting so uh
I want people to understand and some
people will be they'll already know a
lot about fasting and fair enough but
for people that don't understand there
are actually two fuel sources that your
body can use glucose sugar that's where
most people spend all their time and
even if you're eating a high protein
diet some of the protein can be turned
by your body into glucose and so most
people live their entire lives there in
a modern context but from an
evolutionary context your body would
need to be able to go whoa there's no
food I can't just Keel over and die and
this is the whole point of storing body
fat but I think one thing that people
Miss is that if you're constantly
intaking calories
uh especially if you're eating a lot of
carbohydrates you may never and I mean
never switch over into burning your fat
and so your body is is just storing and
I remember the first time it hit me that
hold on a second there are people who
they are literally only getting fatter
their entire life so the fat that they
put on when they were nine is still just
stored and it's never been released
because you're only going to release
that fat if the blood sugar drops to a
certain level for an extended period of
time and then your insulin becomes low
and now the fat can actually be released
into the body that was like startling
and I was like yeah oh my God so what
we're trying to do is create a scenario
where and for people that that are just
listening not watching we both keep
doing this motion with our hands of like
clicking over
you're trying to create the
um the setup so that your body will go
oh word I don't have any food coming in
so I need now to switch the Machinery
the the literal metabolic Machinery over
to burning ketones instead of glucose
once you do it and this is the thing I
always try to get people to understand
once you do this it will change your
relationship to hunger it isn't that you
don't feel hunger like I'm hungry right
now it's not overwhelming by any means
but I am hungry but I'm not distracted
by it I'm not it's not diminishing my
performance And So It Goes hunger goes
from this thing of like it's all
consuming it changes my mood
um I can't be productive to
uh yes I would like to eat but there's
no sense of urgency so well said so well
said so I had the same aha moment when I
first dove into the science of fasting I
it hit me one day I was like oh my God
we have the wrong discussion when it
comes to weight loss and food we're over
here looking at the sugar burner system
and we're saying this is the diet that
you know maybe it's vegan maybe maybe
it's carnivore maybe it's the HGH diet
maybe it's Weight Watchers whatever
we're over here debating the weight loss
diet and we've left the whole fat
burning system out of the equation like
how did we get as humans to this point
where we have only been looking at food
as as the possibility for gaining or
losing weight we've missed out a whole
metabolism and I think that's what I
want people to understand is this is how
your body Burns fat it does not burn fat
by manipulating food it burns fat by
manipulating when you eat and how much
time you're giving the body a break from
whatever food you've chosen that's how
you burn fat
it's really interesting so when we talk
about step one if you want to get into
fasting is actually to change the foods
that you intake when you are eating
when I think about some of the fat diets
that have happened where you know people
are like doing juice cleanses and stuff
like that and ends up not being
sustainable is it are they I mean they
must be getting into a fat burning mode
just through the the sheer reduction of
calories but is it
causing is it is it just that it becomes
so hard to switch the metabolism over
that it's a very unpleasant thing to go
that long without calories because the
juice is so high in carbohydrate well so
conversation
well we've done in reducing calories
over here or out exercise or upping our
exercise is we change our set point so
let's use an example let's say you bring
in a thousand calories or let's let's
give it a little more 1500 calories
still very low very low and you you
exercise 500 so now you have Delta of a
thousand so in order to keep the weight
that you're at you have to always have
around that Delta of a thousand calories
what happened with fasting that changed
the weight loss game is people got out
of that mode and they started to see
weight if I just changed the time period
Then what happens is I go over here into
this fat burning mode and I can be there
19 hours 20 hours 36 hours is one of the
greatest weight loss
fasting lengths and my body is so smart
that what it does is it says to your
point hey word there's no food coming in
so we're going to click over into
another fuel source called ketones and
we're going to make this Ketone by
burning fat and the only way we can get
that is by clicking over we can't even
get that by reducing our carbs down we
can't get that by you know struggling in
a low calorie diet and every time we're
over here trying to manipulate this
system we are only finding ourselves
suffering and not being able to sustain
those results which is why I think the
fasting movement took off is all of a
sudden people were like wait a second
over here there's a whole other level of
Health I never knew was possible and I
could never accomplish when I was
focused on just the foods I was eating
so let me ask them
um so I have I've done a fair amount of
fasting I intermittent fast 365 days a
year which you may tell me is actually
not ideal I vary the length so on the
weekends it's going to be maybe 14 ish
hours but during the week it's you know
18 19 hours
but if I'm just doing caloric
restriction so I'll I'll paint a picture
I used to be 60 pounds heavier and I
over two years I dieted down and I did
what I'll call rabbit starvation so I
was eating virtually no fat virtually no
carbohydrate it was just literally
um boiled chicken breasts and steamed
broccoli I mean that was basically my
life for two years and it was miserable
yeah it sounds like really miserable uh
it was still super inflammatory and but
I didn't understand any of that while I
was doing it and now I can control my
weight so much easier through fasting so
but why why would it be that keeping my
calories and I was about at about 1500
which is why I made a point of saying
that's really low because that was
painful for two years
um
why would that be so deeply unpleasant
whereas even doing a punctuated 24 like
if I did it would be if I had to redo it
all even just doing a 24-hour fast once
a week probably would have led me to
roughly the same results absolutely um
so why was and I actually don't know the
answer to this why was one so unpleasant
and the other so manageable because if
I'm burning fat I must be in ketosis
right not necessarily not not
necessarily I mean it would have been
interesting back then to put a ketone
reader on you you know to measure it and
see where you're at yeah when what in
that example what was happening is you
were bringing your blood sugar down and
that up and then it would go down and
when it would go down if you ate again
it would you would just it would go back
up and then it would go down you know I
was just eating chicken breast and
broccoli oh yeah yeah yeah well broccoli
you know it's gonna it's got glucose and
it has just chicken and to your point
protein will will raise will elevate
your blood sugar but you're just going
up and down within one system you and
again it would have been really
interesting to know your Ketone levels
because once you click over and you're
making ketones what ketones do is they
turn off the hunger hormone and then
they also sharpen the brain and you when
you when you think about that why would
the body do that I mean this is the way
I'm the way my brain thinks is I always
go into what is the body trying to do
well back in the Primal days when we had
to go hunt for food
we needed this alternative fuel source
to power us up so that we could we could
go and find food so when key to when
you're burning fat and you're getting
this Ketone Rush hunger gets turned off
mental Clarity becomes very very uh
focused and and your muscles start to
power up and you become a hunting
machine
because you're supposed to go find food
for your survival
so now in this day and age we don't have
that we can get stay on the couch and
get onto our phone and just have
doordash bring us food and we don't ever
have to leave the sugar burner system
but if we don't then we never get the
healing that's over there we never get
the performance angle that's over there
so on what I would say is in your
example even though it was low glucose
you weren't raising your glucose you
were probably not getting as much of the
Ketone Rush that you could have used if
you had just taken that same diet and
compressed it into maybe an eight to ten
hour eating window now that diet would
have probably worked better for you
because you would have clicked over into
ketosis and felt amazing that's so
interesting and you're right I wish I
had had
um so I when I'm really tracking this I
do finger Pricks like constantly uh also
I'll wear a continuous glucose monitor
but they didn't exist at least easily
back then
um but now so I didn't know about
ketosis when I was doing this
so I can't swear but now that I know
ketosis I can feel it I know when I
click over like I can guess when I hit
about 0.5 yeah I can tell you I'm at
about 0.5 when I hit one I can get
pretty close I'm usually within like
point two of where I'm at which is
pretty trippy when you think about how
it's like oh I know this feeling yep
cool I'm in ketosis I'm going to
guarantee this is like a 0.5 to a point
seven or this is a one to a 1.2 I'm
somewhere around there
um I as it goes higher than that I can't
really track so anyway I bring that up
because when I was doing rabbit
starvation I never felt that
am I going to call it a sense of relief
I never felt that like I'm okay here it
was two years of misery to the point
where my wife at the end of it pulled me
aside and was like you don't have a
personality and it was because I was
just grumpy all the time and there's no
sort of joy in Mudville which is what
when you originally said like you know
there's there's some playfulness to all
this and I was like not back then yeah
there was no playfulness it was
horrendous yeah and so when I think
about
people trying to get into this
I imagine if they've ever missed a meal
and they're so annoyed and so frustrated
they can't
grapple with no there's really when you
click over into fat metabolism it really
does feel very very different yeah so
okay let's talk about people then that
can't imagine that how do you help them
cross the chasm we were talking about
this before we started rolling you love
somebody uh they think fasting is
dangerous let's start with that well the
fasting is dangerous piece is the first
thing is you need to get caught up on
the current science because the current
science is is mind-blowing and in the
book I put six different lengths out
that were all based off science but one
of my the easiest one to kind of wrap
your head around is what we call 16-8
where they show that if you take all the
the let's say you don't work on your
food you're just going to eat the
standard uh Western diet highly
inflammatory but you eat it in an eight
hour eating window leaving along this 16
hour period where you're not eating you
are literally metabolically immune from
insulin going up glucose going up high
blood pressure liver damage cholesterol
you become immune from the the damages
that that high inflammatory diet has
okay that alone is mind-blowing to me
because let's say you're listening to
this and you're like well I don't really
want to change my food I've got food
addiction issues and I've worked with a
lot of people with food addiction that
we've been able to help them overcome it
by learning how to fast
if you just start to tiptoe your way in
like I'm just saying you can let's say
you're like listening to this you're
like I'm not doing the food changes okay
so could I just get you to push your
breakfast back a half hour now you're
I'm not take a second to Define
intermittent fasting or time restricted
eating so people know the difference
between what I'll call a water only fast
uh
in fact walk us through the six stages I
think that's the right place so uh and
and I think the a deeper part of that
question is what what is a fasted State
and it's really when that blood sugar
comes down enough that it triggers the
body to switch
so that's the first thing to know at uh
13 hours we start to see that growth
hormone goes up which is what slows down
the aging process helps us burn fat we
also see in men we see testosterone
start to go up 1300 increase in
testosterone with just a 15-hour time
period which is insane insane we see
inflammation CRP goes down which is an
inflammatory blood marker will start to
go down 13 hours all at 13 hours in fact
one of the greatest studies ever done on
women was they took a group of women
after they had had traditional breast
cancer treatment and they had them just
fast 13 hours every single day and they
noticed that there was a 64 percent less
reoccurrence of breast cancer in the
group that all they did as fast was 13
hours a day they didn't even change
their food they just fasted if your
mission is achieving Excellence you must
support your body
introducing ag-1 this Powerhouse blend
is packed with 75 premium vitamins
minerals and Whole Foods sourced
ingredients that elevate your immune
system uplift your mood and promote
restful sleep and athletic greens is
offering our listeners a free one year
supply of vitamin D and five free travel
packs with your first purchase don't
miss this opportunity to optimize your
health and truly be legendary
so when we at that intermittent fasting
level is really easy can be easy I know
if you're listening to this and you're
like it's not easy and I want to come
back to how do we make it easy for these
people but that's the destination we're
going to is once we get to that first
ledge of 13 hours okay now metabolically
things are changing that or if you can
just do that repetitively which I
haven't had a person I haven't been able
to get to 13 hours consistently within a
matter of weeks we can get them there
and so now you're there you're
experiencing this okay what else do you
want to experience 17 hours we stimulate
autophagy the cells start to repel them
repair themselves and old aging cells
get you get rid of 24 hours your whole
gut might resets and you get intestinal
stem cell stem cells that come in and
repair the whole inner lining of the gut
36 hours your body goes and finds that
stubborn fat specifically around the
belly and it starts to burn that for
energy 48 hours with no food coming in
now all of a sudden you're getting new
dopamine receptor sites okay why are you
getting that because your brain has got
to get motivated to go find food so you
reboot the whole dopamine system and
then 72 hours the whole immune system
reboots itself and recycles itself
that's that's without a drug that's
without a supplement that's crazy that's
why I'm like this we have to get to get
this out to the world this is our door
out of chronic disease we just gotta
train people how to get over there and
that's then to your point getting over
there is the hardest part but once you
learn how to do it it's it's insane it's
insane the Miracles that your body will
perform yeah so this the pushback on
um this is a dangerous game fasting
that's the one that really uh drives me
crazy yeah because the exact opposite is
true that's right and if people don't
get into things like like autophagy
then there so look this is hypothesis
and I'm certainly not a researcher but
when I look at some of the information
like you talk about breast cancer but
just cancer in general some of the
hypotheses that are coming out some of
the early studies that show that you can
decrease your likelihood of certain
cancers through fasting it's utterly
fascinating and it makes sense if we
know that the thing all of us have
cancer cells in our body at any time
like if you were to take uh I would
imagine just a blood biopsy probably
enough you'd be able to detect cancer of
certain types but the immune system is
going in identifying these cells and
shutting that down and if you have an
immune system that is compromised
because you're chronically battering it
with highly inflammatory foods and so
the immune system is just working
overdrive to keep the inflammation up
because remember the inflammation is
good in certain contexts chronic
inflammation is bad so you've got your
immune system working overdrive to keep
up all this inflammation
and it's not been able to get to all
these cells so autophagy which we
haven't defined yet it's probably worth
telling people exactly what autophagy is
so that they understand getting that to
turn on ends up being a very big pro
health issue yeah so autophagy is where
the cells realize that there's no
nutrients it's nutrients and blood sugar
glucose coming into the cell so it's
like an internal mechanism where the
cell goes huh nothing's coming in okay
we got to make sure a that we're a
better version of ourselves so we need
to clean up the inner workings here so
it'll push out viruses it'll push out
bacteria out of the cell and say hey
you're not serving the cellular energy
right now it will go into Old Parts
Cellular Parts and the endoplasmic
reticulum and the mitochondria and it's
like hey we got to clean up our act
because we have to be of more efficient
cell the other thing that it does is
it'll say hey you know what this cell's
going rogue the cells becoming a cancer
cell this is a senescent zombie cell
that's going to start to Aid you quickly
quickly they're a weak member of the
team and so in this fasted state where
no glucose is coming in no nutrients are
coming in uh you're a liability and we
need to get rid of you and so it gets
rid of those cells so it's like taking
the trillions of cells in your body and
cleaning them up and clean and getting
rid of the ones that are no longer
serving you
again I don't know a supplement or a
medication that can hit autophagy in
that way like fasting does it just
cleans everything up when you get into
that autophagy State it's really
profound yeah the fun thing so my wife
is Greek and so I have done my best to
learn the Greek language and
um autophagy is autophagy which is
self-eating which is pretty interesting
to when you think about it that way that
the body actually goes and says okay
you're not going to feed me cool then
I'm going to eat things in that are
already inside the body but it has so
much
um without saying cheesy phrases like
evolutionary intelligence to what it
eats and in what order yep but one thing
that I've heard people say is that one
other thing that gets eaten is the
bacteria in your gut the microbiome will
actually eat the mucosal layer of your
intestines and then that can be
problematic what say you you to that is
there a problem with that in the fasted
State yeah oh I love this question
because when you look at the science and
I've spent
I mean ridiculous amount of time on
PubMed going through all these articles
what's so interesting about the
microbiome is in the fasted State you're
right what happens is though there's a
dramatic shift where bacteria that no
longer serve you are being die are being
killed off the whole pH of the system is
changing there's something called
geographical relocation where all of a
sudden the microbes start to spread out
so they're not all clumped together in
the fasted effectively foraging like
there's nothing to be found here that's
actually really interesting idea they
probably are you're probably right
they're like yeah I never thought about
why are they spreading out it's it's
because they need to they need to find
where the nutrients are so they instead
of being clumped together they spread
out it's very interesting so if I was to
do a stool test on day three of a fast
or let's let's make it more applicable
to the average person somebody who's
intermittent fasting and they've been
doing it every day 15 hours and on the
30th day I go in there and I look at the
microbiome it may look as if there was a
depletion
but that's okay because we want to
create a change we want to get rid of
the microbes that are no longer working
for us which is why what you break your
fast with is massively important because
if you reintroduce the the foods that
feed the good microbes now I think of it
like this you fasted and the microbes
are like okay like we spread out there
are no nutrients there's no glucose like
things are changing in here we got rid
of the bad guys not sure what to do now
and you come in with a bunch of
sauerkrauts and you come in with nuts
and seeds and you come in with
polyphenols like olives and even like
dark chocolate and all of a sudden the
good microbes are like hey wait our food
our food is here it's here we can eat
and then it the good microbes eat and
now you're rebuilding your microbiome so
when we look at gut changes it's the
combination of the fasting window with
what you reintroduce food what foods you
reintroduce back in that's really
interesting so it it becomes oh God I
don't know how the medical community is
going to respond to this but uh the
reason that
um chemotherapy works is it basically
weakens everything like it it just
obliterates your entire immune system
kills off so many cells but
the idea is that a cancer cell is a
little bit more vulnerable than
everything else and so you go just far
enough to kill the cancer cells but not
so far that you end up killing the
healthy cells so fasting sounds like it
might be working in a similar fashion
where it weakens everybody but if you
come back with only food that feeds the
good guys now the bad guys never get out
of their weakened State and they
continue to die off because there's
nothing in your reintroduction to bring
them back yeah that's really interesting
so it's like hey guys I'm going to
weaken you all but I'm only going to
re-feed the good guys that makes a lot
of sense I never thought about that I
was a little maybe more Reckless than
that with my refeed yeah uh
so okay so you already hit us with the
things that we should be eating the one
in there that I didn't understand
because I look I I give criminal amounts
of side eye to uh nuts and seeds so
break me of that myth well so it is a
Prebiotic so for starters it needs to be
raw let's start with that because nuts
and seeds that are pasteurized or dry
roasted or dead it's dead food so it
tastes so much better yeah right hold on
I don't know really you don't agree no
I'm one of my madness one of my favorite
things is raw cashew or raw cashew
butter I won't say that it's not nice
but compared to a roasted one oh yeah no
I can't I can't my my taste buds can't
taste a difference that's interesting
but what about almonds can you taste the
difference yeah definitely now that is a
little grassier let's just say it's a
little more a raw like
best way to eat in eat an almond is
sprouted raw organic like that has the
most amount of nutrients in it and you
know the the logical thing is well what
about the lectins and the oxalates well
when you leave those enzymes in there
those lectins and oxalates don't matter
anymore because you have the enzyme
innately in that sprouted almond that's
going to help you break down the lectins
and oxalates the Menace you dry roast it
you've killed that so now you put it in
in your body and yeah the lectins and
oxalates are going to be a problem but I
will to your taste bud question I will
say a sprouted almond is not a culinary
taste bud joy that goes on with that
it's not not as good like I love roasted
almonds they are absolutely fabulous and
I used to uh eat a lot of pecans long
time listeners in my show will know that
I had to abandon them because they are I
have some sort of dramatic problem with
them yeah
um and so I ended up getting tremendous
amounts of brain fog finally figured out
that it was the pecans who would have
known should have just asked my sister
who gets migraines from pecans
didn't put two and two together I don't
get migraines but massive brain fog but
anyway the uh raw ones I would force
myself to eat raw ones because I thought
they were better but the taste profile
oh my God like a a roasted pecan is is
freakishly good it is a cruel trick that
nature has played on me because I find
them absolutely fabulous did you get a
headache did you get a headache with the
raw see so there's this the same thing
with dairy oh but it would totally ruin
whether I eat them raw or baked doesn't
matter in terms of brain fog I just
don't get headaches right my sister does
okay because that's the it's what we do
to food often that makes it now a toxic
food for us so it dairies the same thing
and this isn't I don't know why this has
to be so controversial but when you
pasteurize Dairy you're killing the the
probiotic the good bacteria that's going
in you're killing the enzymes it is a
dead food when you take that same food
and you leave it raw now when you drink
it you've got the enzymes you've got the
probiotics to break down the lactose
that you might be reacting to okay time
out
so are you saying that because I ended
up cutting out Dairy so I would on
Sunday so I have a whole routine Monday
through Friday I'm ultra strict uh super
clean Whole Food
Saturday I eat whatever the hell I want
including ice cream yeah but on Sundays
was the day that I would get the
weirdest reaction from my food so I
wouldn't have any problem with my ice
cream on Saturday but on Sunday by the
end of the evening I would get so
internally hot I don't know how to
explain it I felt like I was warm not
like you get warm from the outside I was
worn from the inside I'm like oh this
feels so weird I do not like the way
this feels whenever somebody comes to me
with a problem like that I say what are
you eating a lot of and figure that out
and I'm like the only thing I'm eating a
lot of on Sunday is pizza and so but I'm
scraping the toppings I'm not even
eating the bread so I'm like
okay cheese pepperoni olives like what
is it and as soon as I cut out the
cheese I was fine so I was like whoa I'm
having a problem with dairy so are you
saying that if I were eating
unpasteurized Dairy that I would be okay
yeah yeah that is what I'm saying and
I'd love for you to try it it exists
yeah in America oh yeah well so let's go
down that Dairy the raw cheese cow's
Dairy yes is gonna have these enzymes in
it now when we look at the molecule size
of dairy we have to remember that for
our human guts the best thing that we
can digest when it comes to milk is
mother's milk and the molecule size is
probably you know like the size of them
what do you mean human yeah like yeah
like mother yeah like human milk yeah is
there a business here
I mean it's weird like we all feel like
it's uh taboo but this is a whole
another drink milk from the breast of a
cow but we're weird about drinking milk
from the breast of a human that's I mean
look there's maybe some bizarre moral
implications but I'm gonna yeah I'll ask
it so
are we like if we could get
unpasteurized human milk are we like in
a great metabolic position oh it's
incredibly healing just talk to although
it's so high in sugar yeah well so so
you're gonna have to I mean you'd have
to test it on yourself with a monitor or
something like that again is it high in
sugar and is it causing you a problem
that's a whole nother can of worms to go
down because what's high in sugar and
causing you problems may be different
than what's causing me problems based
off our microbial differences in our gut
so we can't just say oh any anything is
like a a wonderful like let's just use
the milks that this is going to raise
your blood sugar for everybody and and
this is going to bring it down there is
the Nuance of what goes on in your gut
bacteria that controls that so that's
the first thing but I want to go back to
your to your to your question which is
when we look at human milk like breast
milk yeah it it has all the immune
enhancing capabilities that we don't get
in other animal milk and its molecule
size is easier on our digestive tract so
when we look at why so many people are
reacting to Dairy cow's Dairy we have to
realize is that it's this cow's Dairy is
like this huge molecule size it's like
you know let's just for the people
listening that aren't visually seeing
this it's like a basketball size whereas
mother's milk human milk is like a
tennis ball size so there's this
molecular mismatch that's so hard on our
gut now in between those is sheeps and
goat and they're a little bit closer to
a human mother's milk molecule size
which is why a lot of people can't do
cows but they can do goat now if you
take the very very best milk out there
outside of Mother's Milk would be raw
goat's milk because now you've got the
enzymes you've got the probiotic and you
have the molecule size and they make
that in cheese and if you could put that
on your pizza it would be a game changer
okay so how do we safely get raw goat's
milk into our lives
I thought you're gonna say mother's
balcony no well I mean so um
it's in supermarkets all the time yeah
oh yeah if you ever go to air one what
yeah it's gonna be in a higher end yeah
raw and you go to Europe safe yeah and
well so when you're looking at cheese
remember that cheese has been fermented
so that's I mean look at what a
charcuterie you know experience why do
they pasteurize the milk before turning
into cheese if we're already gonna get
the fermentation process
it's a great question well I think
pasteurized milk it became a safety
issue for so many years when you are
mass producing large amounts of milk
then you're going to end up having this
issue of like okay some people are gonna
react to this bacteria differently than
others so I think that's where it
originally came from but if you go and
study the Western price foundation you
know he's been that that whole world
under the Western price world has been
around raw dairy for years and that raw
dairy can be healing
um it's it just it's like one of those
myths that's perpetuated so you go and
walk into air one walk into Whole Food
well Whole Foods they have raw goat's
cheese but the higher end really
high-end health stores and a lot of the
farmers markets have raw goat it's it's
the taste that's going to be the biggest
issue you might not like the taste well
I don't know that's uh so again my wife
is Greek she's actually from Cyprus or
families from Cyprus and so she
introduced me to something called
halloumi which is typically made from
goat's milk and I couldn't love halloumi
anymore if I tried now the irony is
until this conversation I'd cut it
effectively out of my life because I was
worried that it fell into whatever was
going on with me getting overly hot when
I eat too much cheese uh but if goat's
milk isn't problematic because I had
actually never noticed it with halloumi
and so that might be why that's really
really interesting about think about
this from this angle when the whole
world ends this isn't kind of like a
nutritional fad right now but remember
when lactose intolerant was like a thing
everybody would walk around and maybe I
thought it was Yeah well yeah I just
don't hear it and people say they they
go well I can't do gluten which is a
whole other conversation but I don't
hear people walk around and say I'm
lactose intolerant
um and but they used to and then we
would give them lactate or lactic
enzymes or there was special milk or
they'd put the lactose back in
okay but wait we pasteurized this
product we killed all the enzymes
and now we have to add an enzyme back in
that we just killed to be a make it so
that some people can digest it why don't
we just keep it in its raw form and I
feel like this with all food it's when
we start to manipulate food and change
it that it becomes unhealthy gluten is
the same place right now we've we're
breeding a whole different strain of of
gluten but when we just come back to the
basics this is like such a big part of
my message is we've over complicated
food and we just need to come back to
how do I get that food in its most
natural state where it hasn't been
touched by man and then I pair that with
these different fasting windows I truly
believe that is the diet that most
humans should be working from and that's
how we end chronic disease but the
minute we think we gotta burn out the
bacteria and then add some enzymes in or
the whole gluten-free world has become
this like you read those ingredients
they're incredibly toxic the keto
world's the same thing all the low carb
foods are now adding toxins back in and
we have totally destroyed a great
example with keto is Oroweat just came
out with a keto bread I picked that
thing up I looked at it and I was like
this is just a toxic bomb so yeah maybe
it won't raise your blood sugar but it's
got toxins in it that's going to make
metabolically switching very difficult
are there certain toxic ingredients
people should be on the lookout for
yeah except for they keep changing them
all the time so you know for starters
um any of the the bad oils so in this
bread because it's keto they wanted to
keep the fat content up so it had canola
oil and cotton seed oil so it's
inflammatory and makes you insulin
resistant now if they made that same
bread with olive oil
now you're now you're now you're in the
bar the ball what is the thing that they
do to make a bread keto how are you what
what's the the mass that they're using
if it isn't uh wheat yeah usually
they'll do like almond or the and
they'll put like urethra tall as a
sweetener or Stevia as a sweetener which
can also still elevate your blood sugar
so
um tapioca flour is another big one that
they'll add in
um but you know again this is why I'm a
fan isn't going to spike your blood
sugar well exactly it's it will but they
what they've done is they've removed
what we perceive as the grains and
they've added in substituting grains but
surely the the package will say this has
x amount of carbohydrates and if it's
above a certain threshold like even if
keto is just a marketing word and it's
it doesn't I don't know if keto has a
medical definition or not yeah from the
FDA but uh uh
tapioca flour is used in a lot of a lot
of Keto foods and I know people that
have measured their glucose after eating
it uh not on this particular one because
but that would be the place to go
individually the end of one this is
where everybody would need to go
themselves I can tell you what I have
measured on myself
um that's a big keto trend is all the
cauliflower flowers so cauliflower pizza
cauliflower chips those are cons they'll
say on the packaging grain free and what
I when I measured on a glucose monitor
it's it spikes my blood glucose
incredibly High interesting because of
the
um the what what's the little white
thing called you just said it
um
having a stroke over here what did I say
about fasting doesn't impair your
cognition maybe it does uh so
cauliflower uh would if you just ate raw
cauliflower would it Spike you well so
there you go now we got some Fiber in
the raw cauliflower but when we distill
it down into an actual flour
f-l-o-u-r different type of flower
now you've refined it anything we've
refined we've now manipulated it and
that spikes blood sugar
okay interesting this is why boys and
girls at home watching or listening I'm
telling you cgms are awesome yeah
continuous glucose matter
um it uh I'm I'm very unsensitive to a
certain part of the population that
cannot control their obsessions and so
whenever I talk about measuring stuff
inevitably there are people that are
like oh like don't get obsessed with
measuring things I I think that's the
wrong message get control of your mind
don't allow yourself to fall prey to
Loops like yes you don't want to become
obsessive that's very wise but to
something that you've said multiple
times you have to be able to do an N of
one you have to understand how your body
responds to certain things so I'll I'll
put pecans and baby carrots on the table
for me I could never have imagined that
pecans would create brain fog in me and
I really wouldn't have guessed that baby
carrots will Spike my blood sugar my
glucose uh like not it's not as bad as
ice cream I don't want to exaggerate but
if I eat carrots to satiety I'll go from
say 84.85 to 115 120 125 depending on
how hard I go and so I remember the
first time I looked at my uh data and I
was like what the hell did I eat that
spiked me like that I'm like that's like
a Saturday Spike right and I realized it
was baby carrots yeah and I was like
whoa now I can eat one or two and I'm
not gonna see a big move but if I again
if I eat them to satiety I'm gonna eat
and these are baby carrots but I'm gonna
eat 15 yep and so I just I really
thought vegetables were a free pass yeah
barring things like sweet potato or
potato or whatever like I got that Roots
like that we're gonna Spike me but I
really didn't see carrots coming and so
one carrots are high in sugar already
which I just wasn't thinking about but
it may not Spike my wife in the same way
that it does me and so in fact the
difference in how we respond to food
between my wife and I is dramatic and so
that really became the first n of one
for us was we could sit side by side eat
the same thing and have wildly different
responses and so measuring this stuff
seeing for yourself what works what
doesn't yeah I think is really really
important so anyway it'd be utterly
fascinating to
try something like a cauliflower
f-l-o-u-r uh and see if that spiked me
because man when I look at things like
that I think free pass if this tastes
good I'm all in
so one of the things that I've really
realized in teaching the world fasting
is how how this food addiction is such a
hurdle for so many people and I and I'm
going to take it back to the women
because I feel like you know it's when
fast like a girl came out what has
really shocked me is how many 20 and 30
year olds women are have are just have
massive eating disorders and what I'm
seeing clinically working with these
women the ones that I'm working with
one-on-one is that when we get them
changing the calorie counting
conversation and we get them doing
instead of counting calories counting
blood sugar put a CGM on them and say
okay now go eat and just eat you usually
what I do is I say go eat whatever
you're going to eat you can count your
calories however you want to count them
the first couple of weeks and then send
me your glucose map and let's look at
this what we're seeing is that these
women that feel like they're in control
because they're counting calories what
they're doing is they're getting these
glucose spikes that are up and down all
day long which is actually keep keeping
them in this sugar burner State longer
so then I I switch that around and I say
to your baby carrot example try baby
carrots with some hummus try it with
some cheese now go scan your glucose
monitor let's look let's see what
happens and I would tell you the same
thing what is it when we add a protein
or a fat to a carbohydrate even if that
carbohydrate has fiber like a like a
baby carrot you slow that Spike down and
you can most likely handle that food
better and it's going to help you if
you're not spiking your blood sugar
you're going to be able to switch over
into the fat burner fasted state so much
better
um
it's really interesting so here's a
horrible thing but I think you're gonna
jive with this when I meet a woman I
just assume sheather has or has had an
eating disorder period
why why is that such a safe assumption
you won't be 100 correct but man yeah
you're gonna be right A lot of the time
yeah yeah that breaks my heart and and
you're probably right uh God so many so
many things but I will tell you that the
big big ones that I see one is that you
know it's the societal we're trying to
look a certain way and so we've been
taught to look out that our external how
we look externally is how we get love
it's how we get validation because
that's the society that we're living in
and will you let me push back on that
yeah please and I'm very open but I I
would say that's you're raging against
biology not Society
um tell me more so when I think about
this and this is this isn't a free pass
to just be oh however we end up being as
a society that's fine because it's born
to biology but I think that um
when you understand what prompts it
which is nature has reached inside my
brain and said you're going to find
these things attractive because they're
signs of fertility now of course there
are also there's a societal layer so
when I was young the thing that was in
Vogue was like super skinny but still
large breasts right and now it's big
butts are like the rage and women that
are slightly thicker
but that hasn't changed in as far as I
can tell in my very non-scientific but I
would say still accurate assumption that
just being a female who is competing for
the attention of men and to compete
against women who are often their
harshest critics with their body again
you're the thing you're actually raging
against is a societal layer that is born
of an evolutionary drive to find the
most fertile and probably high status
women or women that confer the most
status to you because they are
considered the most beautiful
um and so when people attack a a very
worth attacking notion at the level of
society they run into problems because
really you have to address that that
you're getting this biological impulse
and at the risk of going too far afield
but I think this is really fascinating
um they did a study where they looked at
what age group do people find attractive
based on their own age and for women
there's a four-year span that is glued
to their own age so two years older than
them two years younger than them is
their sweet spot of what they find
attractive in men men it's a 22 year old
female no matter how old they are so
they could be 14 they find a 22 year old
attractive they could be 85 and they
find a 22 year old attractive and and it
was one of those that it it is brutal
and as somebody who's married to a woman
that's only Aging in One Direction
it's like I fully empathize with her
deeply but at the same time it was laugh
out loud funny to me that that's what
Nature has done and it's just so so I I
have so many things I want to say on
that so the first thing is okay that
would make sense because EV our
attraction is all built around
reproducing yep so there is that and
that would make sense that an older man
would find a 22 year old more attractive
because it's a fertility thing totally
makes sense but when you're looking at
what makes a woman what the woman that's
the most fertile is actually her hip to
uh waist ratio which is the only thing
that runs across culture across time ah
yeah his hips away right hip two ways so
I want to throw one other weird thing in
here that uh I think isn't discussed
enough and it keeps showing up in a lot
of conversations which is we're also
attracted to each other through smell
yes and there's a very interesting study
that shows when women go on birth
control and they meet their spouse it
was done in heterosexual relationships
that they have a different smell profile
that they're attracted to if they're on
the pill 10 years into the marriage they
try to get pregnant they get off the
pill all of a sudden the attraction is
different and so I went down a rabbit
hole looking at that and I was like what
is the attraction what is the smell you
gravitate towards and it's for women it
is the one that is going to support her
immune system the most because once
she's actually pregnant she's got
foreign DNA in her from her husband's
sperm
it's crazy crazy so when we look right
so when we look and we tie this all
together I think it's just like the
nutrition and fasting conversation we
have Mis directed what we think makes
somebody attractive what makes somebody
healthy what diet we need to be on We
there's so much going on under the
scenes of what attracts you to somebody
else what makes you you know feel
vibrant as a woman and when I hear that
the 20 and 30 year olds and the are have
all these Eating Disorders I just want
to say like okay everything you've been
taught about attraction is wrong
and we've got to start to unwind that so
we can come back into these natural
patterns that are that we are using
subconsciously
it's interesting so I've never heard the
uh pill thing tied this scent before
yeah I've heard the studies about okay
ladies uh here are 12 t-shirts laid out
before you uh smell them and just rank
order them and when they do that they
rank order them in uh the ones that they
find the scent the most appealing is the
person with the most genetic variation
so to your point about it would give you
uh it would certainly give your child
the most advantage in terms of a a far
more robust immune system and then down
to the ones that they find uh the scent
least appealing so if you slip I can't
remember if they actually did this or if
this was just somebody's hypothesis but
that you would expect that if one of
their siblings were put into that mix
they don't know they're just smelling
the shirt that they would actually rank
them the lowest I remember right that
was interesting yeah I didn't know that
part of the study that I mean it would
have to be true right for for that is
the hypothesis that that or that is the
prediction that that hypothesis makes
like that if this is about genetic
variability then the people that would
be most likely like you your siblings
you would find the least appealing which
is very interesting but going back to
this idea of food addiction so
um we women are struggling with it 20s
and 30s maybe the worst which is already
fascinating but
um how do you begin to help them break
this yeah so this is such a great
question the first is we've got to get
them looking at something like a
continuous glucose so just get away from
calories
yes it's a control issue so I I've I've
I've proven this over and over again
with people with severe food addictions
and and eating disorders is I always say
give me two weeks just You Can Count
Your calories if you want if that helps
you feel in control I want you to not
look at your scale if they can sometimes
they just they have to anyways but I
want your focus for the next two weeks
to be on what foods are doing to your
glucose
and the name of the game is less spikes
so you just don't want to see those
spikes going up and down so when you get
your chart on your meter you don't want
them going up and down six eight times a
day you want them going up and down
maybe twice a day and when how tight do
you try to control that range uh well so
then you want to see it go down like I
don't like it to go above like 120. I'd
like to see it hover around that and
then I'd like to see it come down within
a half an hour pretty quickly do you
think about daily averages yeah daily
average like I'd like to see it 95 100
okay would be really good interesting so
that feels High to me are you being are
you being overly generous because you
know what people's limitations are yeah
I'm being over overly sensible okay
because what I overly sensible way what
do you mean by that well like what I've
learned in like teaching the world about
glucose and fasting is that when if I
say like the 70 to 90 is a is a perfect
range but if I take a woman who's food
addicted has 8 glucose spikes that go up
to 120 you know throughout the course of
her day and I say you got to get it to
an average of 75. it's too far of a leap
and what we often don't need motivation
to start to eat different we need
momentum and so when we come over here
and we say your gold standard is you
know 1.5 ketones and your gold standard
is 75 an average of 75 glucose every day
it's it's the the one the single mom in
the in the who's working two jobs that's
just trying to make it and if that's her
goal it's it's not sense it's not easy
for her to follow and she's just going
to stay in her she's going to feel like
I can't win yeah this is all a loss and
the story I always tell is I during the
pandemic I had a high school principal
in South Carolina reach out to me and
she said she followed me on YouTube and
she said I'm very concerned because
we're going back to school and my
teachers are freaking out about their
immune system will you come give a talk
to them or like a zoom talk so I did and
I talked all about like fancy ways to
eat and supplements and how you can
improve your immune system all the many
of the things we're talking about right
now and at the end of the conversation I
asked if anybody had a question this
very brave man raises his hand and he
said you know I hear what you're saying
but if I'm at a grocery store and I'm
looking at a nut butter nut butter that
has the right oils compared to the
inflammatory ones that's eight dollar
difference and I don't have that's eight
dollars I don't have and then another
woman raised her hand and said I get up
at 4 30 I'm at school at five I work
till five I come home have to take care
of my kids the easiest place for me to
go is through the McDonald's
drive-through I don't know how I can do
all these things you're saying and it
hit me in that moment that I had done
them a disservice by tricking out much
of a conversation like we're having now
because if it gets confusing if food
gets confusing if Health gets confusing
we get blocked and we just fall back
into our old patterns
with glucose yes 70 to 90 somewhere in
that average would be amazing but if
your average is 120 and you get down to
110 you are moving in the right
direction and that is awesome so I want
to make Health approachable for
everybody not just the people who can
afford it or the people who can
understand it how do we do this so that
everybody can win
I'm going to make one sort of last ditch
effort on the people that uh are
struggling they're buying the wrong nut
Butters etc etc uh so
at Christmas I do everything wrong and I
love it it's it's a two-week period
where I take a vacation from all of my
rules and regulations so I live my life
by a very strict set of rules that I
will credit most of My Success with my
willingness to write down what those
things should be and then to actually
live by them but at Christmas I go
completely off the rails there is
literally nothing that is off limits for
me if I want to eat ice cream every day
I will eat ice cream every day I don't
drink alcohol but like if I wanted to
and not not as a hard and fast but very
rare because I don't like the way that I
feel the next day not hangover because I
don't push it that hard but like it just
makes my stomach feel gross I don't know
how to explain it but
so but even if I wanted to have alcohol
for sure go for it no problem so really
really I'm off the rails at Christmas
but what I have found is that by
intermittent fasting
that I can still keep my average glucose
this is eating ice cream this is eating
cookies breads whatever I want I can
keep my average glucose in the 75 to 85
range as an average but I'm gonna Spike
up to like 150 155 I don't like the way
I feel north of 170 so I won't do that
even at Christmas I just don't like the
way it feels
um
I'm going to do some exercise which is
something we haven't talked about yet
which is you want to manage your glucose
levels eat whatever you want and then do
air squats like you don't have to go to
a gym literally you're there you're
talking to your kid they're walking you
through homework whatever and I get the
psychological energy but if you just did
150 air squats you will be startled at
how much that starts pushing your
glucose down yeah I still to this day
I've done it so many times I know it
works but I'm still shocked that with A
continuous glucose monitor over a 30 to
60 Minute period you can watch your
glucose just going down down down down
down down yep because you're doing some
minor air squats okay if you do enough
of them they can be pretty tiring but
just doing air squats you can drive your
glucose down so between intermittent
fasting and over Christmas I'm not crazy
I'm not doing my like 18 19 hours but
I'm gonna do 15 16.
by doing that and air squats I do a
little more than that but like that sort
of general direction
I can keep it 85 yeah and this is not uh
anything fancy this is the cheapest food
you can imagine so I I'm eating all the
things I grew up with and people that
don't know my story I did not grow the
money so I grew up on you know
Rice-A-Roni uh and we we didn't eat
Hamburger Helper because that was the
expensive stuff that's how I grew up
okay I'm talking boiled hot dogs on the
cheapest white bread that you can
imagine now Wonder Bread we did not
splurge on Wonder Bread okay right this
is so I'm going back to all those like
Comfort foods from when I was a kid
and with that simple protocol of
intermittent fasting and a little bit of
big muscle group exercises I'm able to
maintain for the entire two weeks on
average of below 85.
because again why that what you just
said is will work for people regardless
of their socioeconomic uh resources so I
love that and you were insulin sensitive
going into the holidays that's fair
so you're not talking about somebody if
somebody's listening to this and they're
like oh my God I cannot move the needle
on weight loss and I have an extra 50 to
100 pounds to lose and they do what you
just said they're not going to get an
average of 75. and that's so well said
so no keep going yeah and and so I I'll
give you a really cool example I had
last year I had a man who was over 300
pounds come to me and asked for my help
I love this story and he basically said
I asked him what's your biggest hurdle
why can't you he's like I've tried every
diet I said what's your bigger biggest
hurdle he's like I am just food addicted
and I'm like okay so in my head I'm like
if I get him to change his foods and he
was drinking 12 sodas a day oh my God
that was the obvious thing for me to
take out the amount of sugar the amount
of sugar I had so much to say on that
and but he told me he was food addicted
so I didn't want to just be another
person that came in and said you need to
get off your soda so I said just eat
whatever you're eating and can you start
to move your breakfast back an hour and
your first month the only goal I don't
even want you to touch your food the
only goal is I want to see if you can
eat all of that food in about a 10 hour
you know 11 hour eating window so I need
you fasting 13 to 15 hours and so he did
first my I I that's the only advice I
gave him we talked a month later he had
lost 13 pounds in the first month
he was still drinking 12 sodas a day so
then I said okay next second month I was
like could you just drink your soda
outside the house so you know like if
you want to have it at work great but in
at home don't don't eat it and he said
well can I drink Crystal Light and in my
head I'm thinking no you can't drink
Crystal Light but I was like go for it
just because I was like I don't know
what I'll do as glucose so he just drank
he did his soda outside his house and
second month lost another 10 pounds now
he's fasting about 15 hours third month
we added in protein I still didn't take
much away and I got his eating window
down to about an eight hour consistent
eating window and I had him increase
protein because when you increase
protein you increase muscle when you
increase muscle you increase more
insulin receptor sites so third month he
lost another 10 pounds this went on for
we've been working now it's been about
six to seven months he's down a hundred
pounds Wow and his his food preferences
have changed because back to the theory
that when you start to intermittent fast
you change your microbiome and when you
your microbiome is what's often
controlling your taste buds so when you
were saying well oh my god do you I hate
nuts and I interpret that as well you
and I have different microbiomes not
that I hate nuts is that I think of them
as falling into the evil category oh
okay not I love it if you tell me that I
can eat nuts I'm gonna eat the most nuts
I love them but uh that that is really
fascinating I hope people don't blow
past that because I would not have
believed you until I did it and realized
whoa the things I actually crave really
do they really are different now yeah
and so going back to this idea of the
difficulty that you have diminishes
tremendously the longer you stay
consistent with this your microbiome is
changing you become metabolically
flexible so you can burn sugar or burn
fat your microbiome will whatever you
eat a lot of your microbiome will scream
for more that's right and so if you're
eating bok choy and eggs like I eat a
lot of then your microbiome screams for
bok choy and eggs that's right and so my
microbiome isn't screaming for cookies
cakes candy pie because I just don't
need it right that's right but what do
you do with the food addicted person
they that is dopamine for them that is
joy and so that's one of the most brutal
things about a long fast is the the lack
of there's still there's no dopamine
yeah you suddenly realize oh I eat food
like a drug like even my normal food my
eggs and bok choy give me a dopamine
response that's right actually you going
to make your eggs and bok choy gives you
the dopamine for sure so I'm getting
dopamine right now thinking about going
for my eggs exactly so but but this is
why fasting is so pivotal for that food
addiction piece is because now what we
can do is we can get you some ketones so
that we can calm the hunger down a
little bit and we can change your
microbiome so we change your taste buds
and it's not going to happen overnight
but what we've seen is that over even a
couple of weeks to a month you will
start to see the changes happen to
people's food preferences and this guy
is a perfect example of it by five
months in he told me he was completely
off of soda he was completely off
crystallite he wasn't eating his buffalo
wings anymore and I I said to him why
like how did what happened and he goes I
don't know I'm just not craving them we
changed his microbiome first by using
the tool of fasting and now all of his
food addictions changed and he burned
fat so that he could finally release
that weight that he will never get gain
back again unless he goes back to those
food preferences if your mission is
achieving Excellence you must support
your body
introducing ag-1 the this Powerhouse
blend is packed with 75 premium vitamins
minerals and Whole Food sourced
ingredients that elevate your immune
system uplift your mood and promote
restful sleep and athletic greens is
offering our listeners a free one year
supply of vitamin D and five free travel
packs with your first purchase don't
miss this opportunity to optimize your
health and truly be legendary
that is the game changer of metabolic
Health when we look at only 12 percent
of Americans that are metabolically fit
we have to stop trying to look at food
as the only answer we've got to change
the internal environment so the taste
buds make different decisions that is
going to change our where metabolic
Health goes in this country and actually
worldwide
yeah one thing that really tripped me
out was when I learned that I think it's
70 plus percent of the serotonin in your
body is produced and stored in the gut
yeah I was like what I I was as
astonished by that is when I learned
that your the vast majority of your
immune cells are in the gut yeah and I
was like why would that and then I was
like oh my God it's the only place that
foreign bodies
regularly make its way into your body
because I always thought about well I
get a cut and that's what my immune
system is about or I breathe in a virus
and that's what my immune system is
about
bro like the amount of things that you
eat is something like two tons a year
right that one person consumes like the
amount of bacteria viruses fungus
foreign bodies like ever all of it right
is what you eat yep yeah and I think
that's such a good point is that we have
gut health is definitely I don't want to
say it's making a comeback but it's
definitely we have more of an awareness
about it
but we are just babies and understanding
the microbiome We Are We There is so
little that we know and we're just
coming out of this antibiotic world that
we've been living in for so long where
we're eating antibiotics in our Meats
we're taking antibiotics for everything
we're putting antibiotics on our skin I
mean we we have really been after
killing these bacteria and in that we
have destroyed things like serotonin
production and that is a nuanced
conversation that needs to not be
nuanced anymore it needs to come to the
surface because you the way you think
what you crave your energy the way you
sleep all of that is tied into the gut
and to your point if you're eating the
wrong foods every couple of hours you
are destroying everything from your
immune system to your neurotransmitter
production to your ability to burn fat
and so we've got to have a tool that we
can start to shift that and that's why
fasting because because of its impact on
the microbiome is so powerful
[Music]
yeah man who would have thought like
where you literally have to keep eating
to stay in a diseased state right which
is crazy like if you just stopped and I
get it you can't stop forever but you
can man if you're obese you can stop for
a very long time a very long time see
your doctor work with them blah blah
blah but do you know the length of the
longest fast
um there is it's over 300 days I met a
man one time this was about five years
ago I met a man who was on day 267. and
he had totally healed himself now I want
to tell you because I met him in person
uh there was a smell that came off of
him that was UN like a little bit
difficult because really yeah because
his body washing ah well I'm sure he was
I didn't think to ask that I mean we
talked about it he wasn't it was a group
of doctors and he was sharing with us
what his experience had been
um the body was just getting rid of the
bad I mean that can happen on a
three-day water fast you'll smell very
differently whoa because your body's
getting rid of all all the toxins the
all those senescent cells are being
destroyed it's a process called
apoptosis where those the cells just
start to die and then that smell comes
off
um he had loose skin like you wouldn't
believe
um the first like he told us that the
first 20 or 30 days he had rashes all
over his body just moles fall off
yeah what because the body just went
into this massive repair stage wow
I'm not saying we should all fast that
long but he it was an incredible healing
tool all right well I'm gonna make you
take a stance here you're you're
morbidly obese like that where we're now
in Life or Death Mode
and you get past that initial hump and
let's say you go because the longest
I've ever fasted was five days days four
and five were so miserable I was like
I'm never doing that again but I I may
just be doing something wrong so let's
say that he gets to the other side of
whatever that hard part is and he's like
I feel great I'm losing fat I have no
impulse to eat I'm working with my
doctor all my vitals are awesome and
certainly all my vitals are moving in
the right direction
um heart uh is looking better EKG my
I've had my artery scanned they're
getting clear like he's just going in
the right direction and so I'm I will
make the base assumption in this
question that he is working with a
medical professional
um
should anybody that meets that criteria
keep fasting or would you be like no no
you need to start eating something I
think in that space specific scenario
now I don't I want to make sure people
don't extrapolate that into their own
personal scenario yes going fasting when
when the guy that we that I saw he had
tried everything else nothing was
working and so it was a beautiful
example of how he stepped out and said
okay body let me see what you can do on
it on its own and he was working with a
doctor he was wearing a glucose monitor
he was measuring his ketones he was
getting blood work every month that is
the pivotal part of the of the yes that
I will say that in that scenario it
absolutely keep going as long as all the
markers are saying that you're staying
safe and the healing will continue to
happen and that idea I get will upset
some people and we'll rock some people's
minds
what I'm finding is that people
are blown away at the Simplicity of a
healing tool like fasting and so when
you take a chronically ill person and
you say all he's got to do is not eat
for a certain period of time
it's it blows everything we've ever been
taught about health care we have been
taught Health Care needs to be
complicated and what we're saying in
this example is you're coming back to
the Simplicity of just letting the body
heal itself and miracles can happen and
we see it all the time but in that
scenario you're giving me it's so hard
for people to wrap their head around
because it's too simple we want help we
we've been taught Health should be a
little more complicated than that
I'm going to push that a little bit
further and say one I I am sending love
to everybody listening to this you can't
imagine how many people that I I love
are morbidly obese and I believe you
cannot hate that which you love and so
man I just really really I'm sending
love when I say this but I think part of
the reason that people derail on that
now that I'm thinking about it is that
that means that they could do something
about it that they too could fast and so
if you're right and they're they're not
happy with how they look or feel and
maybe even people are telling them they
need to lose weight and their argument
much like me to my wife about if I eat
the cookie I will feel better and this
is so unfair uh when the answer is you
just have to be willing to do something
hard and and it's actually only hard in
the beginning right you're you have to
be willing to do something hard and so
that is not going to resonate
emotionally and that's going to make
them feel badly about themselves and so
it is far and if they're not into to
themselves enough to realize oh this
feeling I have is actually self-loathing
it's me creating the self-loving because
I'm not judging them I'm not looking I'm
just saying hey you can do something
about it so whenever you're writing this
what I tell everybody that I love the
struggles with this
I love you no matter what whether you
decide to make a change it it doesn't
matter to me you have expressed that
you're in distress that you have some
sort of pain whether it's psychological
about how you look or it's it is real
physical pain that you're struggling
with because you have such a
pro-inflammatory state
I love you no matter what I just want to
see you happy and
this option exists for you whenever you
want to go down that path
but that if somebody doesn't have the
emotional the the self-awareness to
realize that that emotion is based on
shame that they are taking on themselves
that and they may not even understand
that that's the what's generating that
emotion and so if they could see okay
hey this is you you judging you and
being in control is always a good thing
and now if you're willing to do this you
can get a different result and if you
decide not to you're not a worse person
you're not a better person if you do it
you're just in a less inflammatory state
which is a whole host of feel-good
things that go along with it
um
but that's my gut is that if you do find
pushback on things like that that that's
that is
um it's emotional difficulty the I
always say that fasting's a mirror
and you don't know what's going to get
reflected back to you tell me more when
you take food out of the equation the
mind starts squawking at you and it can
a lot of things will show up and I can
only share like what showed up for me I
was I one of the things that a story I
probably don't share enough is that my
mom taught me to be an emotional food
eater and it looked like this oh you had
a bad day let me make you a meal and I
got a meal and I got Mother's Love and
so when I went into my 20s and out into
the world I was an emotional eater I
used food to soothe myself
so when all of a sudden in my 40s I
discovered fasting the first time I did
a full a full day fast and I was
miserable I had no no resources for my
misery and so to soothe you know to
soothe my misery so what I had to do in
that moment is I had to find new ways to
get a dopamine rush I had to find new
ways to change my state because food is
a state changer so I learned music I
learned uh going for a walk I learned
sitting at the ocean and staring at the
ocean I learned calling a friend like I
came up with a long list of things that
could change my state that gave me a
little bit of a dopamine rush so the
first thing is when you're in this
fasted state pay very close attention to
the words that your brain is telling you
because that's the work the emotional
work that needs to be done now I had to
unwind my mom who basically said if you
don't eat you're going to feel worse and
the longer you don't eat the worse
you're going to feel so I had to go into
this place of like wait my body can do
this wait it she's wrong so I had to un
undo mom's impact in my brain which is
probably why I love the science of
fasting so much is once I understood the
science I felt a little more comfortable
and that voice quieted down so the way
we talk to ourself in the fasted state
is the work right there and then the
other piece is of all of a sudden you
get bloated while you're fasting okay
well that a lot happens to a lot of
people constipated and Bloated without
any food for days there's that's a sign
your microbiome is something needs to
shift in your microbiome it's the mirror
if you get brain fog okay there's toxins
in the brain that the body's trying to
get rid of you need to think about more
healing for the brain so there we can
look at the symptoms plus the patterns
of thought and now we know what we need
to work on if we're willing to take
responsibility to your point and that's
a hard one because when I realized that
I used food for the dopamine that that
took some that took me some time to
really have a different relationship
with food I re it took me about a year
or two to really start to unwind that
and that and that can be hard and other
people might find like I mean this is a
really touchy subject but other people
might find gosh the extra fat I'm
carrying is actually a protective layer
for me it holds keeps people separate
from me because I don't really want
people to get to know me I've seen that
happen before or I can say I want to
lose weight but then that would be make
me attractive and then I'd have to think
about dating again and I found that
every time I'm in a relationship that I
have some a problem and I get hurt there
so I'm going to keep the extra weight
because I don't want to make it possible
so that I can date so I don't get hurt
again there's so many pieces to it that
to to just choosing your food so when we
go into the fasted State all of that
reveals itself and if we're willing it's
an opportunity for us to go okay this is
what I need to take responsibility for
this is what I can start to address and
to me that is so that is so powerful and
and I I say this with love so if these
scenarios resonate with people please
know like working with a therapist
making sure you're being guided through
that process but that that's what sits
at the other side of learning how to
build a fasting lifestyle is you you can
finally heal some of these wounds if
you're willing to look at them and take
responsibility for them
wow yeah I I agree with that very
aggressively So speaking of it being a
mirror and things that are revealed so
day four and five for me on a five day
fast were miserable I felt like I had
the flu I had no energy
um I felt really brain foggy so
how do I prep myself or what can I do
differently in the middle of the fast or
leading up to the fast so that I don't
get that kind of just it made it I I was
like as long as I own a company I can't
do this again because it it literally
ground to a halt for two days yeah so
you know here's what I usually say if
you're going to go into a three to five
day water fast which why would you do
that you are rebooting your immune
system so we know that from Walter
Longo's research where the old white
blood cells will be washed out and new
ones will come in so in your example I
would say well your immune system was
shedding itself and that's why you felt
so horrible just like a cold feels
horrible because when you have a fever
you're burning out an infection and it
feels horrible does that mean that it's
going to be horrible for everybody or is
there no okay and and I bet if you did
it again it would be different because
that was that was the first time I've
done the first time you did it is there
then a number of years that can go by
where it's now going to be hard again
well if you came out of that and you
were eating really clean lifestyle and
you were fasting and all the different
you know maybe you fast 15 hours
sometimes you go 19 like today and you
were learning how to metabolically
switch yes it'll be it would be a lot
easier the next time because that first
dose is like you're getting rid of all
all of the junk so over time these three
day water fast four day water fast get
easier and easier and they become very
reparative in a positive way the example
I use a lot is I had a achilles tendon
injury I tried everything to heal it I
didn't want that Achilles to snap it's
that's a brutal injury I everything I
tried and finally one day I'm like I'm
just gonna throw a five day water fast
at it and I just and the way I went
about it is in true respect for the
intelligence of my body I just said okay
I don't I've tried everything I don't
know what to do you heel and on the
fifth day I felt like a buzz come into
my achilles tendon so on day three of a
water fast it stem cells systemic stem
cells get turned on and these stem cells
are going to permeate to your body and
they're going to go to areas that need
the most repair so now on day five I've
had 48 Hours of stem cells and it went
right into that ankle I felt this buzz
when I brought food back into the
equation the buzz was still there for
about a month and within about a month's
time the the injury was completely
healed and it has never ever ever
reappeared since that moment hmm so
that's an example where the intelligence
figured out what it needed to do in your
scenario you were shedding you were
getting rid of stuff if you had hung in
there another you know five six seven
days you would have been a totally
different person I've even used those
longer fasts for uh you know spiritual
Insight I've used it for my business to
go okay what you know I have I'm trying
to figure out next moves I've used it
for book writing
um whenever I need inspiration I throw a
longer fast at it because the noise in
our brain gets less and less and less
and the downloads that come through you
are are profound but to your point if
you're suffering you may not feel as
much of that inspiration but the more
you do it the more you get rid of the
bad and you build the good and it's just
an incredible experience
yeah it's uh it's probably worth trying
again yes it's been a minute that was
probably four years ago yep so be very
curious to see if it were if it would go
better there would be other things I
would tell you little hacks and this is
like more sophisticated stuff yeah like
uh minerals you should we we always
recommend you do minerals minerals so uh
code for assault yes sodium magnesium
and potassium are the biggies so that
would have helped to mitigate some of
the symptoms and what's the easy way to
get that uh just in a packet form like
put it in your water and drink it
throughout the whole fasting window your
whole fasting time so and there's a lot
of good products out there
um you know the one we love is element
and
um a lot of our and if you're eating
element because that has 10 calories are
you breaking your fast uh you're not
breaking your fast so what we've noticed
in our community is that it will raise
blood sugar in a very very small amount
of people so you'd have to test you'd
have to test it so so that's one the
other one that I just tried recently
that just made a three-day water fast
like uh easy I'm gonna be as as bold as
to say easy uh was hydrogen water the
hell is hydrogen yeah so hydrogen water
what it does is it feeds the microbiome
well what is it it's it's where they
pull the hydrogen out of water water is
H2O they just isolate hydrogen and it
repairs there's like over a thousand
studies done on hydrogen water and how
it changes the microbiome because you
isolate out the hydrogen molecule goes
in there and it recharges these bacteria
it fuels them up and then they work more
efficiently so a guy who owns a hydrogen
water company told me about it and he
said you know try it on your next three
day water fast and see if your your
appetite changes he both my husband and
I my husband's the the biggest critic he
anytime I bring anything to him he's
like no no I'm like okay we're going to
try hydrogen water for three days on the
third day we could have kept going we
were both like I'm not hungry because we
because you're feeding the microbiome
hydrogen hydrogen water yeah you're
feeding them hydrogen yes that's it yes
yes
huh so I would love like let's do it
with you I'd love to put you on like a
three-day fast with hydrogen water and
some minerals and see how your
experience is interesting yeah like
that's intriguing enough to to give it a
shot
hydrogen water okay that's um that's
news to me yeah and we'll definitely
have to try that so what are the
frequencies that people should be doing
this is this once a year once a quarter
once a month yeah my belief is twice a
year I like people doing a three-day
water fast in January and I like when
they do it in September and the reason
for that is we all do what you did
during the holidays yeah and so and then
so it's a great reboot and also the cool
thing about January is the whole world
is focused on health which is great so
it makes everything a little bit easier
to do you know January 3rd if you're
like hey I'm doing a three-day water
fast people are like oh awesome I'm
doing a juice cleanse and you have this
collaborative support so and then
September I like it because after the
you know if you live in a in the part of
the world where you summer is June you
know July and August yeah we overdo it
so September is a great one too and then
and they're anchors but twice a year and
then you know just for good health and
for getting rid of the senescent cells
in the body I think that's a perfect
time to be doing those
okay and then our shorter fasts
something people should do more
frequently yeah yeah so I think people
should be short fast 13 15 hours on most
days not every day
um and then you know one day a week I
feel like people should stretch a fast
so you should try to push her fast to an
uncomfortable level and the reason for
that is we going back to something you
said earlier which is when we push a
fast so let's say you you when you said
I'm at 19 hours if you had said to me 20
hours 21 hours is about my limit and
then I get a little cranky I get a
little bit irritable then that's the
place you want to go to because it's a
hormetic stress and your body is
adapting in a positive way you don't
want to stay there necessarily on a
regular basis but if once a week I can
push that fast to discomfort you stay in
discomfort for a half hour to an hour
now the body's repairing in that
discomfort so I like one day a week
stretch it five days a week to do kind
of what feels like a good Groove and
then one day a week to not fast because
you gotta keep kind of mixing it up for
the body so it never hits that Plateau
spot
okay uh fasting has so many implications
right one implication that we haven't
talked about yet is sex hormones so you
mentioned earlier
um what will happen to a guy's
testosterone levels one I'd be curious
to know does that taper off like if the
effect is strong after you know 13 hours
is it still strong at 24 does it start
24 24 to answer that question 24 goes up
okay
research research goes up to 2 000
percent increase in testosterone that's
insane it's insane when you think of
everybody who's putting pellets in their
bodies and trying to get oats yeah like
testosterone pellets to get more
together yeah yeah it's like injecting
pellets you inject a pellet yeah it goes
into I've never heard of this yeah yeah
so is that for uh bodybuilding or yeah
yeah and then it's slow release of
testosterone over time a lot that's more
common for women uh I do know a lot of
bodybuilders are doing testosterone
injections part of patches yeah and
there's a sort of topical creams I've
heard of injections I've not heard of
pellets yeah there's a lot of ways to
get hormones into your body yeah we have
to remember that sex hormones pulse so
they pulse like men you get testosterone
every 15 minutes you're just getting a
pulse and then another pulse and another
pulse women we get a pulse of
testosterone just during ovulation and
so in that five-day window testosterone
comes in a big in in a big way and then
testosterone goes away and that's
despite sexual appetite yeah yeah
perfect part of your cycle yeah it's so
that you you you reproduce I mean it's
that's why testosterone in a woman comes
in in such a huge amount which is
mind-blowing when you think about your
earlier thing about men being more
attracted to 20 year olds women it you
know a man's testosterone doesn't have
to go down over the course of his life
now it does because of environmental
reasons and we can get into that insulin
resistance and toxicity is is one of
them but men can keep their testosterone
at a high level even as they age women
we it's not so much as we go through
menopause our testosterone is going to
go down along with estrogen and
progesterone so we're not going to have
that same desire to reproduce and go and
seek out somebody who is younger and
Matt if you're in a heterosexual
relationship men can keep their
testosterone high and you can still find
them attractive we just our whole
reproductive system changes dramatically
because we are not we don't have eggs
left so we don't have the same desire
our biological need
which is a whole nother Rabbit Hole to
go down yeah it sounds very fascinating
but but back to the 2000 percent at a
24-hour fast for men and what's
interesting on the differences between
the hormonal differences between men and
women is if knowing that research what
we can now say is okay men work off of a
24-hour hormonal cycle women work off a
28 day to 30-day hormonal cycle so we're
working off at two different Cycles
so when we look at a 24-hour fast great
a man can throw it in at any point
testosterone is your number one hormone
you have to drive testosterone will go
up into the brain and convert into
estrogen so and you have very very very
little progesterone progesterone is not
a big player for you women we have
testosterone estrogen and progesterone
and they're all made from the outer
cells they're called the fecal cells of
the of our ovaries and so when our we
put a lifestyle together we've got to
think about all three of those we don't
have the luxury of just thinking about
one when it comes to fasting estrogen
loves when you fast estrogen does really
well when you bring glucose down when
you go into those fasted States and
ketones go up estrogen just positive
estrogen just thrives we also know that
estrogen is necessary going into
ovulation so when you're looking at
things like infertility and PCOS where
we've got this this estrogen imbalance
we know if we can get you fasting at
that part of your cycle you can reboot
that whole estrogen system
progesterone back half of a woman cycle
completely different she wants glucose
to be high and I we have seen this over
and over again on the cgms of women that
they're eating the same diet and all of
a sudden the week before their period
they go I don't know why like my glucose
I'm doing I doing the same thing my
glucose is just going up I'm hungry I
crave carbs I want chocolate yeah
because that's what what progesterone
wants you to do progesterone wants you
to bring glucose up progesterone wants
you need more serotonin at that moment
because you need to bring Gaba up to
calm you the week before your period so
it's going to make you crave carbs you
need you crave chocolate because you
need the Magnesium so they're like
biological needs of this one sex hormone
which is why the behaviors of women
typically change that week before our
cycle whereas estrogen is like I need
glucose to be low so I'm not going to
give you hunger symptoms I'm okay if you
raise cortisol so if you want to go run
a marathon fine go for it I'm going to
be fine progesterone's like no I need
you to not Spike cortisol I need you to
bring glucose up so I want you to sit
your butt on the couch and I want you to
do nothing and I want you to give me
some food that's going to raise cortisol
so I can make my appearance
okay so I'm gonna need to better
understand what are what is estrogen
doing what is progesterone doing because
they make basically the exact opposite
demands of the female I like
testosterone I get you're at your most
fertile you should desire sex spike in
testosterone there we go but I don't
know enough about estrogen and
progesterone yeah so estrogen comes in
the first half of the cycle like day one
to about day 10 she usually Peaks around
day 12. so we're building estrogen the
whole that whole time and day one is
when a woman bleeds so that's a question
I get asked a lot so that first whole
front half is when you're making
estrogen and the number one reason of
estrogen estrogen has to Peak for an egg
to be released
that's the whole purpose of estrogen in
a reproduction sense but you also have
estrogen receptor sites in your brain so
estrogen also will stimulate our brain
function which is why we're so good at
verbally processing this is why
typically now where I know we're we're
stepping into Muddy Waters here but this
is how hormones work is that estrogen
makes it so that we can multitask really
well we can think about a bazillion
different things at the same time you
know men don't typically ha the brain
doesn't work as much that way because
your hormone is testosterone and it
that's what you focus on and everything
else is great so estrogen is verbal
she's cognition she is I call her an
extrovert she's she makes you more
social
so we want to make you more emotional
which is what people think it definitely
can make you more emotional you have a
hot thank you for bringing that up it's
a higher level a spectrum of emotions
you can tap into
it makes us a lot more emotional ask any
menopausal woman where her how her
emotions are when she's on the other
side of menopause a lot of women feel
like they're just a little more
emotionally stable because they don't
have as much estrogen taking them
through all that wide range of of
emotions that they can get did you see
Game of Thrones uh p CS of it my husband
would be upset that I'm gonna tell you
only parts of it yeah so there's a
character in there that I've never it
intuitively hit me right just because of
all the people that I've met in my life
that are in all different phases as far
as women go of their reproductive cycle
but there's a character I forget her
name but she's like the matron matron
like way past reproductive years very
good at playing the game and just seems
above it emotionally like has a really
detached I understand human nature I
know what it's like to be caught up in
the game but I'm not in the game anymore
and as you're as I as I think about my
own I guess you could call them
prejudices about
um
estrogen and what it's like to interact
with women versus it is so different
interacting with men and I've been in
companies that are um hyper masculinized
and I've been in companies that are
mixed it's just very very different and
when I think about okay evolution is the
master here I'm I'm not going to
outsmart Evolution if I were going to
try to create something from scratch I
would just be borrowing From Evolution
so there there is a reason that
in the fertility phase you need to be
able to have this broader range of
emotion as as the
um significant other of somebody who is
you know in that cycle it can at times
be very confusing
being on the other side of that just to
see how this stimulus would have gotten
a very different response from you at a
different time and so that gets hard to
Grapple with uh
but then this idea of the the matron
sort of being removed from that but
having like this real deep wisdom
there's lots of theories around uh the
grandmother hypothesis and and basically
that's how how wisdom is stored and
carried cross-generationally which is
why women go through menopause but they
don't die off because guys have a reason
from an evolutionary perspective that's
obvious for why they keep living into
old age because they can keep
reproducing right so the question
becomes why do women if they're no
longer able to reproduce why keep them
around so anyway this idea of wisdom
transfer I think is a very it is it is a
hypothesis I would not be quick to
um disregard so
does that feel right so we have this
broad range of emotion which I will
God how will I hypothesize this
certainly an Attunement to emotional
needs of kids like you would get why I
would need this dial to 11 so that I can
get an understanding of everywhere that
they would be that I would have deep
emotional reaction to their needs their
wants or whatever and if that means that
I have to myself be more emotional fair
enough
um
but then I don't understand the
progesterone and why we would then does
that dial that down yeah there I love
where your brain's going with this so
the first thing I want to say is that
then estrogen makes us more emotional if
you look at it from a menstrual cycle
standpoint it Peaks during ovulation so
that we can have we want to have an
emotional connection to you so if you
want to have sex with us we need to have
our emotional heart many for many women
that emotional heart needs to be open so
that I'm attracted to you because it's
way more than just the smell of we
talked about way more than the
physicality there has to be an oxytocin
bonding Connection in order for us to
feel motivated to go have sex which is
why estrogen does that at her Peak
during ovulation which is crazy when you
think about that so so we need to have
that full emotional Spectrum wide open
so that we can have this amazing human
connection with you
this the part around the menopausal
woman and this is something that I don't
think gets discussed enough is that many
cultures look at menopausal women as the
wise Elders now in Western culture we
don't look at that we look at it as
we're useless like you know we get
tossed aside at that point but if you
look at Indonesia this is one that I've
been researching recently because we're
heading to Bali in a few months and how
they approach menopause is when a woman
has gone a full year without her period
is now she becomes the Elder that
everybody goes to because they feel like
she is wiser she has all the years of
history that she can impart upon the the
the community she's they consider her
more intuitive but to your point she's a
little more emotionally stable
makes her a great wisdom leader but we
don't we don't look at menopausal women
like that now I also want to say that
people listening to this might be like
this we can't be put into boxes like
this and I hear a lot of women say that
but I want to tell you that I've sat in
the trenches with so many women that
there are so many women that go yep
that's that's how I feel I need
emotional connection with you so that
makes sense that estrogen would come in
I got into menopause I could see very
clearly what the you know the in what
the people around me needed or I saw how
I could support my children and my
grandchildren or or younger people at
work and but yet we don't talk about
this we don't bring this to the surface
we sort of push those away
um
very interesting about the Western
Society not embracing that I can
actually see what you're saying we
certainly have an obsession with trying
to remain young well into that I want to
focus in on the explanation for getting
more emotional as a way to really make
sure that I have a connection with you
there's something that isn't it does so
I often tell people when you're trying
to think through something it should
feel like a puzzle piece clicking into
place when you get it it doesn't feel
like a puzzle piece clicking into place
could be my ignorance I'm super open to
that but just from uh what I know about
evolution
something feels like there's a missing
piece so I I've never thought about this
before and helped me
um think about this so
women are often referred to as having a
detective's brain and for men it's very
different so it is our our genetic
material is very cheap so Siemens easy
to produce you're producing millions of
it every day and so you try to plant it
wherever you can
and so guys are just looking for an
opportunity and there's a great line and
When Harry Met Sally where she's like
well what about women you don't find
attractive he's like no you sleep with
them too and it's like it's funny
because it's like yeah like I actually
get the sentiment
um
whereas women it is a very expensive
commitment to become pregnant um and so
they have to be way more Discerning
Discerning about your genetic material
Discerning about whether you're going to
be around to help provide when they're
in a hyper vulnerable state uh
so I'm one because it would be very easy
for evolution to have said you don't
need an emotional connection to have sex
I mean guys do not need an emotional
connection to have sex
um and so then my question becomes okay
then why did Evolution need you to have
an emotional connection and so it makes
sense to me if
and this will almost certainly be an
oversimplification hormones are usually
so multifaceted but this could be a very
interesting facet if what is really
happening is that nature was like I need
a gating mechanism I need a moment where
you will reject
unworthy suitors and so I'm going to
create this moment where you're not
going to be receptive to their advances
in fact you're going to be way more
scrutinous of their emotional
availability by
um
and look I don't know if it if it is
exactly like this but I'm I'm going to
create a little bit of friction and I'm
going to see if the other person will
navigate that because basically what you
do in that moment is you take men so far
out of their orienting mechanisms so far
out of their comfort zone that it's
I am I'm grapping with an idea I've not
thought a lot about so bear with me but
it's a bit like taking a man off land
into the open ocean and they have to
figure out how to swim with you and do
your thing
and it then feels like a puzzle piece
clicking into place when I think about
basically
Nature has ensured that women take men
into a place where I'm gonna find out if
you can navigate emotionally because if
you can navigate emotionally I can trust
you to be here and I can trust you with
a child that can't communicate in logic
that doesn't exist in any sort of
logical realm whatsoever and I need to
know that you're going to care for them
you're not going to abuse them or me uh
that makes sense what do you think about
that yeah I think you actually I think
it agreed I'm laughing to myself because
I'm like I have never gone that deep
into a conversation like this around
ovulation and again where my brain goes
to is
why would all three of those hormones
need to show up for women during
ovulation it is a five day window where
estrogen literally as at her highest of
the whole month
and testosterone's at its highest and
you have a little bit of progesterone so
what's happening emotionally to a woman
is estrogen at his Peak gives this
emotional Spectrum so now I can have a
deeper connection I love what you said
about I can also decide if you're going
to be the right one for me to to have a
baby with which as much as we don't want
to think about that that is how our
bodies are built a feminine body is
built to procreate that's what we're
about built for estrogen is also going
to give me incredible mental Clarity so
I make the right decision
and I'm going to be able to connect with
you verbally ready to connect with you
so I can have this intimate experience
testosterone comes in so I feel like my
libido goes up but my motivation and
drive also goes up so I'm motivated I'm
smart I'm in I've got this incredible
like spectrum of emotions and then I've
got a little bit of progesterone that
makes me very intuitive and calms me
this is our super power window and it
was designed so that I could connect to
another human so that I can have a
procreate and keep the species going
but in a world where we're not we're
having sex all the time we're not using
it just as a tool to have a baby we
still are seeing some of the patterns of
our belief and our attraction and the
way we show up because these hormones
demand them they're Primal these even
though we live in 2023 in this modern
world our hormones are still the same
hormones that they were back in the
Primal days and they have the same
influence on our brain we just have so
many other distractions right now we may
not be we may have fallen asleep to it
is that helpful yeah yeah and look I'm
sure this is but one slice of what
Nature has in mind but it's it's a
really interesting exploration and as
somebody who
uh really wants to see people get along
with the opposite sex like the more that
we understand where each other are
coming from the better I often remind my
wife if nobody else that uh don't look
at my behaviors and think what they
would mean if you were doing them you
have to understand what they mean when I
do them and likewise I'm not looking at
your behaviors and trying to say what
would they mean if I were doing them I'm
just like okay what do I know about her
Baseline what is she like and so what do
they mean when she does it do you know
her cycle do you know where she is well
so this is interesting and she's talked
about this so I don't think this will be
talking out of school but she hasn't had
a cycle in a very long time and so we
got her off the pill a while ago and it
she just never got her period back she
is probably far too lean
um
that I'm sure is part of it she is a
workout fiend
um she eats very cleanly and she
certainly doesn't try to restrict her
calories but if she
because her calories so clean it's not
easy for her to put on fat so she
doesn't need a lot of carbohydrates or
anything like that most things that
would I think be the maybe more calming
things you're talking about
um her microbiome can't handle and so
she'll have problems there but she's now
working with a specialist to try to get
it back and I will be shocked if one of
the mandates isn't you've got to put on
some more fat
um
I'd be interested too and fast like a
girl I show how to go high carb low carb
like that's what's someone like in that
scenario needs to do I literally pinged
her and was like you have to get you on
the show I was like I think those will
be really interesting because that's the
part of the problem is again we're doing
the same lifestyle so even if you go to
the greatest expert on the planet
they're like oh you need to eat more of
this this and this you need to do more
more of this and and my brain goes yeah
but we are meant to cycle our lifestyle
with our menstrual cycle and so we need
to know to go high carbon low carb we
walk people through it what is that
cycle yeah so what it looks like is when
estrogen's building day one through day
10 we go low carb and we do more fasting
to keep ourselves insulin sensitive so
that's a per all her heavy workouts
amazing during that time we go into
ovulation day 11 through day 15. now we
actually need to bring glucose up a
little bit because you have progesterone
sitting there and so progesterone
doesn't want you to get glucose too low
and you've got got testosterone so
testosterone helps us build muscle so I
love to see women go into more heavy
weights at the time slow heavy reps so
that we can build testosterone at that
moment so that we are using testosterone
in the way that it should be used after
you come out of ovulation all those
hormones crash you can go into your
extreme keto fasting working out but
then about day 1920 progesterons coming
in and everything has to change you have
to bring carbs up you got to bring
cortisol down you need to switch your
workouts to more recovery more of yoga
more hiking you got to say no to more
things
um I just because of overwhelm because
that's what progesterone demands
progesterone if you so let's go to your
wife in order to make progesterone so
that the inner uterine lining sheds so
she has a period that week becomes
massively pivotal and if she if she
doesn't have that if she's not if she's
just powering through the same way
that's the week that hooks up women and
and that's where they're not getting
their cycle and the number of women not
getting a cycle right now is another
huge problem because our Cycles are like
a detox it's a shedding of the toxic
estrogen so she could be getting enough
estrogen to release an egg but she
doesn't have enough progesterone to shed
the uterine lining and so where's all
that estrogen going it's getting stored
in tissues that's not good and so many
women don't have 20 and 30 40 year olds
don't have a cycle and that's a massive
problem wow it's crazy what do you what
what's causing that I in in the most
simple sense it's we're not minding the
week before our period we're not
changing like forever like my mom's
generation they just whatever like they
didn't even think about it
your mom and even me if I look at I'm 53
and I'm a 23 year old daughter
we have mass possibly different
stressors like like my 23 I you know
went to college did had you know enjoyed
myself had fun we didn't have a phone we
didn't have social media glyphosate
wasn't in the in our in our environment
we didn't have uh something that they
called generally recognized as safe
ingredients there's a hundreds of
thousands of ingredients in our foods
that are toxic we didn't put on all
these beauty products that were
destroying our endocrine system I look
at my 23 year old daughter and and I
feel in a sense very sad about the world
that she's growing up in compared to
what I grew up in I look at my 83 year
old mom and she's never had a hormonal
problem because life was so much more
simple we are in an evolutionary
mismatch women are right now with this
modern world and it's destroying things
like fertility and our periods and even
now we're seeing it in menopause and
perimenopause yeah I wish that guys were
escaping the problem but I had somebody
on the show to talk about phthalates and
uh penis size decreasing taint size
decreasing
and I was just like whoa that is scary
uh fertility rates plummeting birth
rates plummeting for a whole host of
reasons not the least of which is
fertility it's really interesting like
in some ways
you know we're living through this
technological Revolution and it's
amazing in a thousand different ways and
there's no other time that I would
rather be alive and then I step back and
I go I've struggled profoundly with
anxiety and when I trace it back so the
biggest change I made my anxiety by a
country mile was my diet and so as I
changed my diet I was like oh my God I
didn't realize like how bad it had
gotten from a generalized anxiety
perspective where I was just anxious at
all times yep at all times and I
remember thinking
I don't even what what am I anxious
about I have no idea it was very
frustrating and so tracking that down to
diet then makes you a bit of a zealot to
like explain to people hey hey like if
you've got depression or anxiety I could
basically guarantee that some percentage
maybe like in my case it's a huge
percentage but some percentage of that
is going to be related to your diet and
your lifestyle sleep and uh all that
yeah and so it's like okay
there was a time where by default you
just couldn't get the problematic
chemicals into you in any sort of
significant fashion and so there were so
many things that we just you you didn't
encounter and so you didn't have to
think about them we when I was in my 20s
you literally never heard of a woman say
she didn't wasn't getting her period
even in my 30s and when I was in my 30s
and everybody was trying to get pregnant
there was a handful of women that were
struggling to get pregnant
so when we look at the trends that are
happening we can't say that it's a
problem just be you know we can't say
infertility is just a new issue we have
to say what is the environment that we
are living in that is destroying but to
your point both women and men's hormones
that is making us weight loss resistant
that is giving us these incredible mood
disorders that's making PCOS the the
biggest female hormonal imbalance that
that we've got what is the the
environment today and that's where
chemicals come up that's where physical
emotional and chemical uh you know
mental chemicals you know we we're
exposed to more toxins we we're we're on
our phones all day long constantly
stimulating our brain
um we you know we're physically not
moving we're not even getting natural
light we are so out of touch with how
the human body was designed to be that
all these things are showing up and then
we give them fancy labels and then we
say oh well let's give them fancy tree
treatments and I even want to say that
we do this in the biohacking world in
the health World a little bit which is
why I'm just we have to make this simple
we've got to go back to our Primal Roots
we need sunlight we need good quality
food women need rest the week before
their periods we we need to go period
times without without eating that is how
the human body is designed and when you
look at I I got this the other day I was
remembering that 1987 is when I
graduated high school and my sister and
I had what we thought was the coolest
cord attached to our we are at our own
phone line that we got to share oh that
was like a big deal and my dad went to
Radio Shack and got us the longest cord
possible so that we could walk from our
bedroom on the phone all the way into
the kitchen and still it was like what a
great today do not know how cool that
was right it was I'm very jealous it's
super cool so think about how far we've
evolved from that
okay but our bodies haven't evolved from
that our bodies are the same Primal have
the same Primal needs
so every single one of these human
conditions that are showing up from the
mental health to the physical health the
first question we need to ask is what is
the lifestyle we should be living to
bring ourselves Back in Balance with
ourselves
because the modern world's not doing it
it's actually pulling us in the opposite
way
yeah it's brutal okay so paint a picture
for me what how do we we are in this
modern world whether we want to be or
not so how do people start turning
things around how do they get things
going in the right direction yeah and I
know it's so depressing right I feel
like we you know you just hit that
moment and you go how are we going to do
this as humans
I think that's that's I've hit that
moment several times like how is this
going to map out for humans if we don't
make some personal changes and to your
point
um you know for starters let's go back
to the basics so of course I'm going to
leave with fasting we've got to learn
the art of fasting so you might not be a
three-day water person but fast person
but could you be a 13 hour a day I can
train anybody to do that we've seen it
over and over again we got to go back to
the Simplicity of food could you just
focus on foods that don't have a label
just just ask yourself did man make this
food or did did Earth make this food and
can I go back to just the simple way of
eating where I'm eating fruits
vegetables Meats if you eat Meats if you
don't then do the legumes and get away
from the refined processed carbohydrates
and and chemicals that that's it we're
not counting macros we're not even
putting a CGM on you third thing could I
start to get natural light like could I
get up with the sunrise where there's
red light red light is going to
stimulate a different hormonal
production in me could I get out in the
middle of the day we have serotonin
receptor sites in our eyes and see full
spectrum light without sunglasses on
just 20 minutes could I just go for a
walk and get some full sun in the middle
of the day you can wear a hat if you're
worried about the the getting too much
on your skin and at the end of the day
could I walk the dogs at Sunset so my
eyes see red lights so I can change my
whole melatonin system and I can improve
my serotonin system
and then what how am I moving am I you
know movement cortisol is meant to make
us move so when I have a stressful
moment can I get instead of sitting in a
chair could I just get up and go and and
move my body so that I'm using cortisol
much like we talked about using glucose
with the squats how often am I moving
moving my body around and then am I
prior prioritizing sleep am I trying I
don't think we need to get seven to nine
consistent hours of sleep in fact most
of the experts I've spoken with don't
feel like you need it all in one chunk
what yeah that's a whole nother I can I
can go down that rabbit hole if you want
yeah but we need to at least be going to
bed we're designed to go to bed about
two hours after the sun goes down that's
when our body starts to repair so am I
getting to bed at a fairly decent time
trying to get seven hours and then
waking up with the sunrise these are
Primal basic needs of the human body
that we're not even tending to so let's
just start there before we get into the
conversation of this super biohack or
this Super Supplement or this amazing
medication let's just go back to our
foundational roots and then let's see
what happens and my experience has been
most everything clears out and people
get their health back on track and
health becomes fun again all right let's
go a little bit into the Weeds on diet
so we're going to be doing the Sleep
getting sun exposure we're going to be
moving around all that
diet is going to be a huge component of
that you've already talked about don't
eat things with a label basically so
don't eat processed foods so we'll chalk
that up already I know you were a vegan
for 10 years uh you were not a vegan now
do you do you have a take like was it
just not right for you not right in
general what's the yeah so um I was a
vegan when I had chronic fatigue
syndrome and prior to that I was eating
really really like high really bad diet
so it was a good shift anytime you
shifted the diet the first time it's
usually if for the positive it's usually
a good shift in the body adapts well the
problem with veganism is you're not
getting enough amino acids and you need
amino acids to make hormones and you
need it to make neurotransmitters and
you need it to build muscle
so if you're on a vegan diet you have to
make sure you supplement with an amino
acid that's that's the one supplement
situation I'll say yeah you're going to
need to go in that door
but the second problem with veganism is
that most people Elevate their carbs so
now they're become so glucose challenged
um they're and they become insulin
resistant so you're going to need to
make sure you're pairing your carbs with
a fat you need to make sure you're
getting enough protein
um we I mean there's so much more
chemistry that's needed in a vegan diet
so why it didn't work for me is I was
just eating carbs and so I was just
gaining weight I was just getting more
and more insulin resistant and I was not
sleeping and I was had brain fog and I
literally thank God I would listen to my
own intuition I just woke up one day and
was like this isn't working I don't love
this body I'm living in now and I
changed and I started to eat meat and
and I dropped immediately dropped 20
pounds within a couple of months of
eating meat whoa so it was it was and my
shocking because the stuff you were
eating while it didn't have animal
protein it still was I'm sure high in
sugar it's high in sugar it was carbide
I was eating carbs all day yeah yeah so
it's just spiking all the time so so now
I have met a lot of people who do vegan
vegetarian and they're like it's working
for me if it's working for you amazing
stay with that it might be that for
right now that's what your body does I
encourage you to know what your glucose
and insulin levels are I encourage
everybody to get a a yearly measurement
of hemoglobin A1c which really tells us
how much those red blood cells can carry
oxygen to the tissues of our body so and
that's impacted by glucose for those
that don't know gets gummed up and can
really slow it down exactly so is your
number below five yeah before below is
that optimal uh 4.5 is optimal is 3.5
even better than 4.5 the studies that
I've seen is yes if you want to slow
aging down if you get it closer into the
four under four three points there's
such a thing as too low
that's a great question I'm not sure I'm
sure there is there's you can definitely
take it to the extreme but
I've I mean I just I've only seen 3.5 in
one human that I've I've watched looked
at thousands of blood tests 3.5 is not
easy to get to got it because you would
challenge accepted yeah yeah oh
I haven't had it checked in years and no
I don't remember the last time but uh my
for the last
12 years of my life probably I've been
very diligent my fat was too low for a
long time but I haven't been eating
carbo in fact God I stopped eating
carbohydrates in any regular amount two
decades ago
do you eat fruit
I do but I treat it like a candy bar so
you're doing meat and vegetables
primarily I do eggs meat and vegetables
primarily so and you know so it'd be
interesting to see what your hemoglobin
A1c is
um you and but then fasting how if
you're fasting 19 hours most day yeah so
I tracked my intermittent fasting like
it was a religion for 18 months and over
that 18-month period it averaged 17 and
a half hours a day including Christmas
day weekends everything so on the days
during a normal weekday I'm gonna be
pushing it into the 18 19 hour range 20
hours uh is definitely not unusual for
me at all
um so yeah so there's a there's a
perfect example I'd be curious what your
hemoglobin A1c is uh my guess if I had
to guess right now based off what you
just told me is it's probably about 4.5
given everything you're doing now what
you're doing most people can't do
so I push back on that so hard what I'm
doing most people don't do because they
have a mental barrier that stops them
from getting through the first clickover
it's me with the cookie and trust me I'm
empathetic I get it uh but yeah most
people because you care about how you
feel and how you think better than than
any then that and I've got a whole thing
around discipline so if it's like my
goals make demands and then I do
whatever my goals demand and at the time
that I went low carb I believed that for
fat loss because I was putting on fat I
mean I was in my mid-20s and all of a
sudden I was putting on fat and I was
eating less than I'd ever eaten before
but I thought that the game was to go
low fat and so the reason was I just I
had up my carb intake massively trying
to avoid fat not realizing that now I'm
just spiking my glucose all day uh and
so I was super confused so I thought for
longevity and for fat loss I had to go
low carb now longevity is still a
question mark can who knows I could drop
dead tonight but from a being able to
control my body composition bulletproof
like and and I am very uh I I know just
enough to be arrogant in my beliefs and
I am utterly convinced if somebody will
only eat
what I give them meaning they they
because I get it they're they're
microbiome will scream out for things
they shouldn't eat in their discipline
may be too low but if they only eat what
I eat I am convinced with 100 certainty
that I can control anybody's body
composition period end of a story like
nobody escapes it I don't care what
disease you have whatever
um I I am just convinced that I can do
that I would a thousand percent agree
with you that if everybody did exactly
what you did that we would we would end
chronic disease
getting people to do what you do
is I I'm not sure I have a lot of
admiration for what you're saying I love
this idea that your your goals create
demands I love your your intensity
around discipline I'm not sure we're
going to get humans to that point ever
oh I can agree with you we won't the UN
For Better or Worse what I have found is
the ideas that I live by are a filtering
mechanism and most people either think
it's just crazy and stupid and why would
you ever do that uh or they love it but
they can't Implement and they certainly
can't maintain which I feel this is
where now I have ideas and I really want
people to try them but now all my
arrogance around diet goes away like
getting people to
so this company's called impact Theory
because I have a theory on how to impact
people at scale which is the ideas that
I live by first of all they're Timeless
they are not my ideas uh they've been
around forever and if you can get these
ideas into somebody when they're young
oh agreed then moving forward everything
is not easy but it's easier but trying
to get adults I I ballpark it at two
percent everybody that's made it this
far into this episode congratulations
you're part of the two percent yeah
right like you'll take these ideas and
you will do something none of us are
perfect but you'll take these ideas and
you'll deploy them
unfortunately 98 of the world they they
might get as far as spiritual
entertainment and so they hear these
empowering ideas and they're like wow
that's amazing I wish I could basically
um and they don't deploy them with any
consistency and so I became obsessed
with how do you get the 98 and that's
why we make video games now
uh that that actually is quite brilliant
um we'll see if it works yeah yeah
because the way the way I approach this
topic like I would love like my vision
of the world is everybody would do the
way you're doing it now for women there
would be some Nuance around changing up
that week before a woman's cycle because
she needs more carbohydrates during that
time
um but I also see that all the humans
suffering from the mental to the
physical right now is self-inflicted and
it's because we're not we're not a
taking responsibility like we mentioned
but we're not really making a one-to-one
relationship that when I pick up a candy
bar it tastes so good I feel so good in
that moment but it makes the depression
worse tomorrow yep we are not making
that connection and that is a major
problem and so this is why I like this
idea of how can I give that person a
little bit of momentum how can I just
have them have a different experience
with that candy bar and maybe the
experiences through a sea Jam like we've
talked about and now they're like oh my
God I was just eating it and I felt good
I didn't realize that that was what's
going on or maybe I tack on some fasting
and they go like we said earlier oh my
God I feel so much better in a fasted
State wait I don't feel so good with
that candy bar like we've got to change
their experience with this poor
lifestyle and once that changes and they
see that a healthy lifestyle is a gift
not a not a not a
um you know not a threat not something
that's like taking pleasure away it's
actually giving them pleasure and that's
what I think you're getting is like
you're like I love this lifestyle
because I operate at my best in it why
would I go to this other lifestyle that
most people are living but they're over
there look listening to you and seeing
that that's deprivation so we have to
show them that there are massive mental
cons and physical consequences to that
and this actually is the gift
and once they get there
now they can build some momentum and
they can go okay wait you know what I do
think a little bit better when I eat an
apple wait a second I do I can go down a
notch on my belt loop because I threw a
13-hour fast at it wait a second I
started to eat you know more of these
raw foods that we're talking about and I
noticed that my bowel movements changed
that's the education that will move that
person slowly over to Lifestyle being
the hero of the day and they can see
that it's absolutely not deprivation is
a complete gift and the example that I
always use is I had a friend who I've
been gluten free forever and I had a
friend who our our daughters were doing
the same Sport and you know when your
kids are in sports together you're on
the sidelines and practices and talking
to each other for hours and days and one
day she looked at me and she goes you
know after several years of being here
with you Mindy I watch how you eat and I
gotta say you don't look deprived and I
would probably say the same thing to you
when you say that you probably don't
feel deprived and the reason we don't
feel deprived is because we feel so on
our game mentally and physically that
there would be no other idea of why we
would do it different why would we do it
different because this feels amazing
but we got to take people from that
place over to feeling the benefits of a
lifestyle that would serve them and that
Gap is where our work is so if you do it
through a video game amazing
I'm trying to do it through like a just
letting them know that their body can
perform differently and then do it
through fasting let me show you a tool
that's free that you can start to make
this shift and now we've got momentum
okay let me show you what else we can do
let me show you like that guy Todd you
know the guy who lost over 300 pounds it
was so amazing to be like okay Todd now
you're gonna add in this food and he
would just come back to me like okay
what's next this is working tell me
what's next
so I don't want to give up on Humanity
but I also want them to have a different
experience with their body and that's
what I hear in in your in what you're
doing is you just have a completely
different experience so people can't
relate because they're like I don't have
that experience in my body
I am very glad that you are offering
people the ability to learn more about
that experience because it really is
life-changing where can people follow
along with you learn from you yeah well
you YouTube's my is my passion project
um two videos new videos every week go
out there thousands of videos
um are there on all kinds of fasting
topics so that's probably the best place
to search for your name yeah sir Dr
Mindy Pell is on YouTube
the forget it you can go to my website
and everything's there um that I'm doing
where I'm kind of everywhere right now
so I'm pretty easy to find I love it all
right guys if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care peace
click here now to learn how to reverse
your age with water fasting and they all
say the same thing including my mother
who at 92 had outlived all 50 of her
lifelong friends every one of her
friends was dead she was alone and she
said Alan you need to warn your patients
if they're going to do this diet make
younger friends